Dear Mom and Dad,

I've spent my life studying people, even before I went to college. In the little book of pictures of the time I visited the ranch, Leslie writes that I asked many questions, wanting to know about the things we do. I've carried this curiosity my whole life, reading every kind of book and getting a doctorate's worth of education on the subject and beyond.

What have I learned? I have a vague and incomplete understanding of a number of things, the human experience is rich and deep and hard to fathom. But a few truths have risen to the surface and seem to bob there, steady and true even after I lose sight of them. Among these faithful gifts there is one that stands out to me now, and that is the importance of stories to our lives.

Nothing captures our attention like a story, and for good reason. We need stories like we need a map, they let us see where we've been, they help us imagine where we'd like to go. Another person's story is no less valuable to us than our own, they help understand our own path. Only after hearing many stories can we begin to draw in our minds a map of life, to guide us and to share.

There is a curious relationship between story and truth. Sometimes we use the word "story" to mean something less than true, and this might be the case depending on the story. But stories also have the power to be something deeper than the basic facts, to shine a light on truth that might not otherwise stand out. A story invites us to understand what happened from another perspective, to take a journey in someone's shoes. Along the way we see what they see, feel as they feel, grow as they grow.

On your Golden Anniversary I told the story of how you met and fell in love and started a life together. It was a joy to explore and tell, the story of your life and love is beautiful by any measure, and even more so to me, your son. An anniversary is a moment to celebrate the good parts of the story, and yet we also all recognize that there is more to the Bollwerk story than the good parts, and that is saying it gently. 

I'm not sure if you noticed, but I said very little about the years of your life after you had kids. That is where the story takes a turn that would have been too dark for me to tell with happiness, and so there is just a slideshow of our happier moments.

What happens when we only tell the good parts of the story? The maps we draw from it will leave out some of the most important parts. They will not lead us away from moments of despair and misery, perhaps even guiding us directly there.

As we have lived out our story, a great many things were never said, important truths never told, help never received. We have shown only the good parts of the Bollwerk story. Our silence came partly from fear and partly from shame. We also do not wish to hurt the people we love. But our silence has hurt us far more than we have understood. I cannot bear to follow that path any longer.

I have tried several times to write our story. I believe it is important for all the reasons I've explored. There are also beautiful parts that I long to convey, and to look upon the story as a whole as beautiful. But each time I try, bitterness and pain rise to the surface. Our story as a whole is not beautiful, not from where we are at in the story, and not told by me. Each day, I feel as if I am slowly being crushed by the pain and anger that I have not been able to work through. It comes out as anger at myself, maybe because I don't want to hurt anyone and I seem like the safest target. It has gotten worse so that I feel it each time I make a mistake or think about a mistake. My can't help but run the code that was written long ago, embedded deep in me.

Dad, you say you do not remember the abuse, but it happened, and it was an ever-present part of our lives. You were capable of flying into a rage, sometimes for the smallest things. You would holler at us, spittle would fly out of your mouth, you would stomp and make aggressive movements. You looked at us like we disgusted you. In your worst moments you would strike us. Not hard enough to cause injury, which I think made it okay in your mind. Being struck by your parent out of rage or disgust does cause injury though, another kind. A kind that doesn't heal very easily. 

As a child, you make sense of it the only way you know how. You tell us that we deserve it, that it is our fault, and we believe it. We understand that there must be something awful about us. We understand that our mistakes are truly unforgivable. There are moments when we understand that none of that is true, that we deserve love, we deserve help and protection. But no love or help or protection comes and so we go back to the other way of understanding. 

Mom, there were moments when you tried to intervene, but you mostly stood by out of submissiveness. Perhaps you understood that stepping in only meant that you would get it worse, which is what happened each time you tried. We mostly did not try to defend each other, because we understood it would only escalate the situation. And the times when we did were the worst times of all. So all we could do was sit in shameful silence and watch each other be torn down.

When we gained some space from you, all we could do is cry and try to make sense of it. I would wish that I could learn to not be so disgusting, so capable of mistakes. Or I would think about running away and living a different kind of life. Or I would pray and ask God to make me a better person. The shame and disgust that you heaped on us resonated with the understanding of ourselves that we received at church, that we were deeply sinful and worthy of shame without the cleansing blood of Jesus. I so very much wanted to be cleansed and prayed for it constantly, but all I knew at home was shame. Eventually I stopped believing that I would ever feel worthy of love, maybe my sin was too great, my mistakes too big.

I thought this way for a very long time until I found better ways of thinking about myself, and not from home. But now, when I am alone, when I am struggling with something small or big, my mind falls into that old way of thinking. I don't know how to stop it, I have tried everything. I am losing the will to stop it, and so now I just let it tear me down like the way you would tear me down, ashamed and silent, wishing I could disappear. 

I don't think I am the only one. I talk to my brothers and sister and sometimes I catch a glimpse of the same kind of angry and sad part in them that I have in me. A part that feels ashamed, a part that believes they do not deserve help, a part that wants to crawl away from the world and be invisible. That story has played out in all of our lives in one way or another, we have not healed.

Although you don't acknowledge the extent of the abuse, it seems like you have tried your best to show us love and support now that we are adults. You have tried to be a better man. I have come to understand you on a deeper level than the rageful father that I knew as a child. As adults we have shared warm moments, and we have even been able to work through a part of the painfulness of our past. You have helped me and supported my work. My work is the brightest part of my life, apart from my nieces and nephew, and you have made it possible. 

It seems like you might believe that we can make up for pain we cause people by simply doing something good or giving them something they want. That's not at all how it works, it is not transactional, there is no pain debt you can just pay off. Especially not when you keep hurting people. The only way to move past it is to grow. It might not seem clear to you now what you need to do, and that is okay. When we wish to grow, we need to reflect and seek answers. The spirit that wishes to grow is a humble spirit, because it sees room for growth. It is a spirit that has dignity and self-worth, because it believes it is capable and worthy of that growth.  

At times, I have simply wanted to move on, to enjoy what happy moments we have left. If it were possible to just move on, to forget the past, I would do so in a heartbeat. There are some injuries that do not heal on their own, and ignoring them has only gotten us to where we are now. 

When I offered I Corinthians 13 as a map to a happier life for us, you pointed out the part that says, "Love keeps no records of wrongs." It seems like you too wish that I could just forget the past and move on. It seems like you don't remember all the times that we have tried to do exactly that, you have been forgiven and given more chances than anyone should expect to be given. When you have expressed regret and the desire to be a better man, you have been welcomed with happy tears and open arms, every time. And eventually, the old ways come back, maybe not as bad as when we were kids, but your anger and lack of respect for the dignity of others still has a strong hold on you. Only it is mom alone who bears the worst of it now, and the unfortunate people who are forced to deal with you in other aspects of your life.

Love keeps no records of wrongs, and those aren't the kind of records I wish to keep either. We must learn to understand each other and ourselves on a deeper level than just "wrong." We must learn to understand our behavior, where it comes from and how to respond to it. We must learn to see each other and ourselves with compassion. We understand that you had a difficult childhood too, that you did not have a good example yourself, but the understanding can't stop there. There are healthy ways to deal with anger, and none of them are possible when we don't acknowledge it and work through it.

I don't know where our story goes. Hope truly does spring eternal, and I will never give up hope for us. But I don't think our story goes anywhere good until we start telling the whole story. The "rest of the story", as you might say. I don't know the best way. Maybe after reflecting and talking and working through some of these issues with someone you trust, you could start writing a different kind of Christmas letter. I do not wish to see you speak about your past with shame, but with honesty. Tell your story like it actually happened, all the parts. I think it would help you, I think it would help others. I think it would help your sons and daughter to nurture a better understanding of themselves, as people worthy of love.

Dad, I know that you will not grow beyond the kind man you have been until you acknowledge the kind of man you have been, until you acknowledge the abuse. Not just to us, but to everyone. The first step toward dealing with your anger issues is to acknowledge them, fully and often, and hold yourself accountable. You have never faithfully done this, and so you have never found a better way. You are much more than the man who easily falls into anger and irritation and lashes out at the people in his life. I have seen that man who can rise above the anger, he has come through for me in certain moments when I needed him most. I admire him and I want him around.

Come what may, some day I will tell my story, and that story involves you two. I will tell it because I think it could be an important map for others. I wish to tell it not out of anger but out of love, and I'm not at a place where I can do that. I wish to tell about you both, the whole story, the beautiful parts and the parts that hurt. I wish to honor you, as I honored you on your anniversary. Maybe it will be easy, because our story isn't over, and I haven't yet seen the good places it will go. We are living it now, so let's make it a story that we want to tell. 
